— Oh, pardon me, Captain, — he began quite boldly, suddenly addressing Nikoladim Fomich, — do take notice of my circumstances… I am even ready to ask them for an apology, if I have erred on my side. I am a poor and sick student, discouraged (he literally said: "discouraged") by poverty. I was once a student, for now I cannot support myself, but I will get the money… My mother and sister are in — th District. They will send for me, and then I… will pay. My landlady is a good woman, but she has been so furious that I have lost lessons and haven't paid for four months, so she even won't send me supper… And I do not at all understand what this note is! Now she is demanding of me, by this loan document, that I pay her, please consider!… — But this is none of our business… — the clerk observed again…

— Allow me, allow me, I completely agree with you, but allow me also to explain, — took up Raskolnikov again, not addressing the clerk, but directly addressing Nikoladim Fomich, yet trying as much as he could to also address Ilyá Petrovich, though the latter persistently feigned looking through papers and looked disdainfully away from him, — allow me also to explain on my part that I have been living with her for almost three years, since my arrival from the provinces and before… before… in any case, why shouldn't I admit it from the start, I had made a verbal promise that I would marry her daughter, a free and entirely unrestricted promise… It was a girl… in any case, she even liked me… although I was not in love… in short, youth, that is, I mean to say, the landlady then gave me much credit and I led partly such a life… I was very reckless…

— None of you need to bother about such intimate details, Your Honor, and there is no time for that, — Ilyá Petrovich rudely and proudly interrupted, but Raskolnikov warmly stopped him, though it was extremely hard for him to suddenly speak. — But allow me, allow me to at least tell everything… how it happened and… in turn… although it's extra, I agree with you, to tell… — a year ago this girl died of typhus, and I remained as a lodger, as I was, and the landlady, having moved to her current apartment, said to me… and she said kindly… that she had complete confidence in me and everything… but that she would like to know whether I would give her this loan note for one hundred fifteen rubles, the whole amount she considered owed to me. Allow me to say: she specifically said that as soon as I gave her this document, she would again credit me as much as I wanted and that never, never, in turn—these were her exact words—she would make use of this document, as long as I myself paid… And now, when I have lost lessons and have nothing to eat, she is demanding it for collection. What shall I say now? — All these emotional details, Your Honor, have nothing to do with us, — rudely cut in Ilyá Petrovich, — you must give your statement and a promise, and what you had the grace to be in love and all these tragic details—none of that is our business.