The pain from the lash had subsided, and Raskolnikov had forgotten about the blow; one worried and not very clear thought now preoccupied him exclusively. He stood there, looking far off for a long time with great attention; this place was particularly familiar to him. When he went to university, it often happened, mostly on his way back home, that he would stop at exactly this same spot, attentively survey this really magnificent panorama and be almost astonished by the same unclear and insoluble impression every time. An inexplicable chill was always blowing from this magnificent panorama onto him; for him, a silent and deaf spirit filled out this lush picture... He was amazed each time at his own gloomy and enigmatic impression, and postponed unraveling it in the future, not trusting himself. Now he suddenly recalled all those old questions and puzzlements of his, and it seemed to him that he had not forgotten them by chance; one thing struck him as crazy and strange, namely, how on this very same spot he stopped just like before, as if he really imagined that he could think the same way now as before and be interested in exactly the same old themes and pictures... even such a short while ago. He even felt it almost funny, yet at the same time something constricted his chest painfully. In some deep depth below, where you can see only just a little under your feet, everything from his past suddenly appeared to him now - all his former thoughts, and problems, and themes, and impressions, and this entire panorama, he himself and everything... It seemed that he was flying up somewhere, and it was all disappearing from his eyes... With one involuntary movement of the hand, he suddenly felt a double kopek coin stuck between his fingers. He relaxed his hand, attentively looked at the coin, then swung his arm back and threw it into the water; afterwards he turned round and started walking home to him. It seemed that he had cut himself off from everything and everybody with scissors in this moment itself.