Never mind!..."

He stopped suddenly; a new, completely unexpected and extremely simple question suddenly threw him off balance and painfully surprised him:

"If it was indeed done consciously, not carelessly, if you really had a specific and firm goal, then how on earth have you still not looked in your wallet and don't know what has been given to you, because of which all suffering has taken place and you consciously went for such a mean, disgusting, low deed? Ah, but you were about to throw the wallet into the water along with all the other things that you haven't seen yet... How is this?"

Yes, it's like that; everything is just like that. He, however, had already known this and it wasn't a new question for him at all; when it was decided to throw everything into the water at night, it was decided with no hesitation or opposition, but rather as if that should be so, as if otherwise it's impossible... Yes, he knew all this and remembered it; was it not decided yesterday itself in that very moment when he sat over the trunk and took out cases from it... And indeed! "This is because I am extremely ill," he finally resolutely decided, "I myself have tormented and tortured myself, and I don't even know what I'm doing... Yesterday and a day before yesterday, and all this time I've been tormenting myself... I will recover and... won't torment myself anymore... But if not? Lord! How tired I am of all this!"

He continued walking without stopping. He was terribly eager to somehow distract himself, but he didn't know what to do or what to undertake. A new, insurmountable feeling seized him more and more with almost every minute: it was an infinite, almost physical revulsion for everything that met and surrounded him; stubborn, malignant, hateful. All those who passed by were detestable to him - detestable their faces, gait, movements. He would just as well have spat on someone, seemed like he could bite them if anyone started talking to him...

He stopped suddenly when he came out onto the Malaya Nevka embankment, on Vasilyevsky Island, by the bridge.