226). Such actions were justified by what is called "police powers" of the state, or as Oliver Wendell Holmes, writing for the Supreme Court in the case "Hudson County Water Company v. MacCartney" (1908), referred to as "limitations applicable to property for the benefit of the entire society." The concept of police powers has a long history in Anglo-Saxon law, first mentioned in 1187. In the 1760s, William Blackstone wrote that "By state police and economy I mean the proper regulation and internal organization of the state, through which people in the country, like members of a well-organized family, are obligated to follow rules of propriety and good breeding, to help their neighbors, and to be orderly, industrious, and obedient in their intentions" (see Blackstone 1979, p. 4, 162). In the 1827 case "Vanderbilt v. Adams," Judge Woodworth of the New York State Supreme Court more precisely described police powers, saying: "The sovereign power in society, therefore, may and should prescribe how private rights to property may be used.... Police powers are based on implied rights and the obligation of the sovereign power to protect all through established legal regulations so that ultimately the welfare of the entire society is increased.... Such governmental power should exist in every well-regulated society." In the case "Society v. Algar" (1851), Lemuel Shaw, a representative of the Massachusetts Supreme Court, supported the legislative authority dealing with issues of regulating property ownership in the Boston Harbor and prohibiting construction of buildings beyond this wharf, and he spoke of police powers as follows: "We consider this to be an established norm arising from the very essence of a well-ordered civil society, where every property owner, regardless of whether he possesses an exclusive right to it or not, manages it with all the implied responsibility so that its use should not cause harm to other people who have the same right to derive satisfaction from using their own property, nor to society as a whole."