Introduction: Property in Economic Theory and Social Practice
Society makes property. Economic systems are defined by what they allow to become property, and the extent of property varies enormously. Some allow property claims to fixed objects, such as land and trees, sometimes including the ephemeral, such as wildlife or flowing water. Some extend property to include ideas (patents); a few include human beings themselves as chattel slaves.
Societies also differ in the intensive rights they accord property holders, the bundle of stateenforced privileges attaching responsibility for the impact actions have on others. Intensive rights prevent us from assessing law as involving 'more' or 'less' protection to property because each use of property affects the property of others. Property has intensive dimensions because it involves reciprocal relationships among people; my intensive right to use property diminishes your right to be free of intrusion. For example, giving one the right to dump wastes into the air and water detracts from the rights of neighbors to clean air and water on their property; withholding rights to pollute reduces intensive property rights but protects the property of others. A society can allow the intensive exploitation of a property owner's land and water even if it damages neighboring property. Or it may privilege neighbors by restricting actions that affect others. This makes property law distributional. Where property owners have intensive rights to pollute, it reduces neighbors' real income by the loss of clean air and water or by the cost of paying the polluter to refrain from polluting. Without intensive privileges, polluters are poorer because they must mitigate their pollution or must buy rights to pollute from neighbors. Few dispute that property law has important effects on income distribution, but some choose to emphasize arguments over efficiency. In a pioneering article, Ronald Coase (1960) argued that regardless of the allocation of property rights, any clear demarcation will lead to the same efficient social outcome, the same mix of production of goods and services. Whether polluters must buy the right to pollute from their neighbors or neighbors must pay polluters to stop polluting, pollution will continue wherever mitigation costs more than the neighbors' valuation of clean air, and will be stopped wherever the costs of mitigation are less. Free market exchange will lead to the same efficient outcome regardless of the allocation of property rights, regardless of who owns rights in air and water. Coase's article has had an enormous impact on economic theorizing, leading many economists to neglect distribution while focusing on the efficiency implications of different legal regimes.
But there are problems with these applications. The separation of prices from distribution holds only in a special case: distribution will affect prices and the output mix wherever economic actors have different preferences and there are increasing or decreasing returns to scale.
Furthermore, as Coase himself noted, his theory ignores transactions costs, or the expenses involved in negotiating and enforcing contracts. These can be crucial in bargaining situations involving externalities where it often proves hard to mobilize a large number of individuals to buy off a single polluter.
The determination of property rights is often regarded as particularly disputatious in a liberal democracy like the United States that embraces both individual liberty and the right of the majority to govern (Horwitz 1992; Demsetz 1964; Dillon 1895). On one side is the protection of intensive property rights as manifestations of a property owner's individuality. Against this stands the right of the majority to regulate economic activity, to advance communal goals and to protect property owners from the external impact of polluters' actions. But this common juxtaposition misstates the dispute over intensive property rights because they too restrict the rights of others.
Property rights give individuals state-sanctioned monopoly privileges over resources, privileges backed by the right to call on the state police powers to restrict the actions of others. Thus, property fundamentally restricts some liberties by placing the weight of public authority behind property owners against other citizens. Rather than a dispute over principles of natural liberty and justice, debates about property regulation involve fundamental choices about which property is to be protected and which property rights are to prevail when property rights conflict.
Contention over democratic rights and regulation has been complicated by the particular structure of the United States legal system where legal questions are disputed repeatedly in different sites of government. First, there is federalism, establishing separate legal systems for every state and the Federal government. Then there is the division at each level of government between the executive, the legislature, and the judiciary, each charged to respect and enforce the Constitution as they interpret it. Compounding these differences of interpretation has been the ongoing division between the written constitution and legal code and the sometimes-legally-valid "Common Law" with its roots in England and interpreted by English law writers. These different sources provide abundant material for judicial interpretation. Oliver Wendell Holmes was not the first to acknowledge that the scope for interpretation gives judges an independent role in American law. As interpreters, they also draw on their experience to make law an instrument to advance their vision of the good society (Fisher, Horwitz and Reed 1993). American property rights have been created by judges and politicians through a civic process conditioned by the peculiar institutions of the American government, legal tradition, and by political conflict.
