Not at all...!"

He suddenly stopped; a new, completely unexpected and extremely simple question suddenly threw him off and bitterly surprised him:

"If indeed everything was done consciously, not carelessly, if you really had a definite and firm goal, then how did you still not even glance in the purse and don't know what you got, because of which you took all the torments and deliberately went to such a vile, disgusting, base thing? Ah, but you wanted to throw the purse into the water now, along with all the things you haven't seen yet... How is this?"

Yes, that's it; that's everything. He, however, knew this before and didn't find this to be a new question for him; and when it was decided to toss it into the water at night, it was decided without any hesitation or objection, as if it had to be like that, as if otherwise it couldn't be... Yes, he knew all this and remembered everything; yes, maybe just yesterday it was decided like this in the same moment when he sat on the trunk and pulled out the cases from it... And yet! "It's because I'm very sick," he finally grumbled to himself, "I've tormented and tortured myself, and don't know what I'm doing... And yesterday, and two days ago, and all this time I've been torturing myself... I'll recover and... won't torture myself anymore... But how will it be if I don't recover at all? Lord! How much I want to get rid of everything!"

He walked without stopping. He very much wanted to somehow dissipate his thoughts, but he didn't know what to do or what to try. One new, insurmountable feeling was taking over him more and more with almost every minute: it was some kind of infinite, almost physical disgust towards everything that met and surrounded him - persistent, malignant, hateful.

Everything he encountered seemed repulsive to him - their faces, gait, movements. He would have gladly spat on someone, bitten them, if only someone had spoken to him...

He suddenly stopped when he emerged onto the Malaya Neva embankment, on Vasilevsky Island, near the bridge.