A representative of the Massachusetts Supreme Court, Lemuel Shaw, supported legislative authority in regulating property rights at Boston Harbor and prohibiting building outside this harbor, and spoke to police rights as follows: We consider it an established rule that has grown out of the very nature of a well-organized civil society, where every owner of property, whether he holds an exclusive right or not, manages it with all the implied responsibility so that its use should not cause harm to other people who have the same right to enjoy their property, nor to society in general. All property in this community... belongs either fully or partially to the government, and is subject to those common rules which are necessary for achieving the common good and general welfare. Property rights, like all other social and customary rights, fall under corresponding limitations necessary to ensure that others have not been harmed by its use, and under established law rules, as legislative authority... can assume it is a necessary and prudent decision. In conclusion, Shaw added: "It's much easier to feel and understand life and the sources of its power than establishing boundaries or limits of its manifestations". Indeed, using universal phrases such as "public interest", "internal arrangement of the state", "implied right" and "duty of higher authority to protect all" and "common good and general welfare", Shaw established that police organs can dispose of a large set of tools in achieving their goals. Governments of southern states resorted to police help to introduce laws limiting property use by slaves, for example, prohibiting slave owners from teaching their slaves to read. Later, after the abolition of slavery, they introduced unusual restrictions on private property rights, such as introducing a policy of strict racial segregation that limited the sale of property to African Americans or their labor activity in certain professions. The application of laws providing unequal protection of property and labor for African Americans once again demonstrates what was understood about property at the time. (See Cohen 1991; Lichtstein 1996; Wiener 1978; Woodward 1955).