— Forgive me, Captain, — he began rather boldly, suddenly addressing Nikodim Fomich, — please consider my situation… I am even ready to ask them for forgiveness if I have done anything wrong on my part. I am a poor and sick student, depressed (he literally said, "depressed") by poverty. I was once a student, but now I cannot support myself, but I will get money… My mother and sister are in the — th gubernia. They will send me, and I… will pay. My landlady is a good woman, but she was so angry that I lost my lessons and haven't paid for the fourth month, that she doesn't even send me meals… And I don't at all understand what this bill is! Now she is demanding from me by this loan note, that I pay her, judge for yourself! — But this is not our affair… — the clerk remarked again…

— Allow me, allow me, I fully agree with you, but allow me also to explain, — took up Raskolnikov again, not addressing the clerk, but rather addressing Nikodim Fomich, yet trying with all his strength to also address Ilyya Petrovich, although the latter stubbornly pretended to be searching through papers and disdainfully ignored him, — allow me also to explain from my side that I have been living with her for about three years, since my arrival from the provinces and before… before… in any case, why shouldn't I confess from the start that I had given her a promise that I would marry her daughter, a verbal promise, completely free… It was a girl… in any case, she even liked me… although I wasn't in love… in a word, youth, that is, I mean to say, the landlady gave me a lot of credit then and I led partly such a life… I was very frivolous…

— You are not required to provide such intimate details, sir, and there's no time for it, — Ilyya Petrovich roughly and triumphantly interrupted, but Raskolnikov warmly stopped him, although it was extremely hard for him suddenly to speak. — But allow me, allow me to tell you partly everything… how it happened and… in turn… although this is unnecessary, I agree with you, to tell it, — but a year ago this girl died of typhus, and I remained as a lodger as before, and when the landlady moved to her current apartment, she told me… and she told me kindly… that she was completely confident in me and everything… but that whether I would like to give her this loan note for one hundred and fifteen rubles, all that she considered as my debt. Allow me, she specifically said, that as soon as I give this paper, she would again credit me as much as I wanted and that, in turn, — these were her exact words, — she would never use this paper as long as I myself pay… And now, when I have lost my lessons and have nothing to offer, she is presenting it for collection… What shall I say now? — All these sensitive details, sir, are none of our concern, — Ilyya Petrovich brazenly cut in, — you must give your statement and undertaking, and what you were in love and all these tragic details, we have nothing to do with.