Not at all!...

Suddenly he stopped; a new, completely unexpected and extremely simple question immediately confused him and greatly surprised him:

"If indeed all this was done deliberately, not foolishly, if you really had a definite and firm goal, then how come you have not even looked into the wallet up to now and do not know what you have received, for which you have endured all these sufferings, and for which you deliberately went on such a mean, nasty, low trick? You wanted to throw the wallet into the water now, together with all the other things you have not yet seen... How is that possible?"

Yes, that's exactly it; everything is just like that. He, in fact, had known that before, and it was not a new question for him at all; and when it was decided at night to throw it into the water, it was decided without any hesitation or objection, as if that was the only way it should be, as if there was no other possibility... Yes, he knew all that and remembered it well; almost certainly, it was decided yesterday, right at the moment when he was sitting over the chest and was taking out the cases from it... And that's exactly what happened!... 'It's because I'm very sick,' he grumpily decided at last, 'I have tortured and torn myself apart, and I don't even know what I'm doing... I have tormented myself yesterday, three days ago, and all this time... I'll get well and... will stop tormenting myself... What if I never recover at all? Lord! How tired I am of all this!...' He kept walking without stopping. He desperately wanted to somehow relieve himself, but he didn't know what to do or what to take action. One new, irresistible feeling was taking hold of him more and more almost every minute: it was some kind of infinite, almost physical revulsion towards everything he had encountered and surrounded him, persistent, malicious, hateful. He found everyone he met repulsive— their faces, their gait, their movements. He simply wanted to spit on someone, to bite someone, perhaps, if someone started talking to him...

He suddenly stopped when he reached the embankment of the Small Neva River, on Vasilyevsky Island, by the bridge.