226). Such actions were justified by what is called "police powers" of the state, or as Oliver Wendell Holmes, writing for the Supreme Court in the case "Hudson County Water Company v. MacCartney" (1908), referred to as "limitations applicable to property for the benefit of society as a whole." The concept of police powers has a long history in Anglo-Saxon law, first mentioned in 1187. In the 1760s, William Blackstone wrote that "By state police and economy, I mean the proper regulation and internal organization of the state, through which people in the country, like members of a well-organized family, are obliged to follow the rules of propriety and good manners, to help their neighbors, and to be respectable, industrious, and tractable in their intentions" (see Blackstone 1979, p. 4, 162). In the 1827 case "Vanderbilt v. Adams," Judge Woodworth of New York State more thoroughly described police powers, stating: "The supreme power in society, therefore, may and should prescribe how private rights to property can be used.... Police powers are based on implied rights and the obligation of the higher authority to protect all through established legal regulations so that ultimately the welfare of the entire society is increased.... Such governmental power should exist in every well-regulated society." In the case "Society v. Algar" (1851), Lemuel Shaw, a representative of the Massachusetts Supreme Court, supported the legislative power dealing with the regulation of property rights in Boston Harbor and prohibiting construction beyond this wharf, and spoke of police powers as follows: "We consider this to be an established principle arising from the very essence of a well-organized civil society, where every owner of property, regardless of whether he possesses an exclusive right to it or not, manages it with all the implied responsibility so that its use should not cause harm to other people who also have the right to enjoy the use of their own property, nor to society as a whole."