Lemuel Shaw, a representative of the Massachusetts Supreme Court, supported the legislative power dealing with issues of regulating property within Boston Harbor and prohibiting construction of buildings beyond this wharf, and regarding the rights of the police, he said the following: "We consider this to be an established norm arising from the very essence of a well-organized civil society, where every property owner, regardless of whether he possesses an exclusive right to it or not, manages it with the entire implied responsibility so that its use should not cause harm to other people who also have the right to derive enjoyment from using their own property, nor to society as a whole. All property in this community... is either fully or partially owned by the government, and general rules applicable to it may be necessary for the purpose of achieving the public good and general welfare. Rights to property, like all other social and customary rights, are subject to the action of appropriate restrictions necessary to confirm that no one else is harmed by the use of this property, and to the action of statutory rules, since legislative power... may assume that this is a necessary and proper solution. In conclusion, Shaw added: 'It is much easier to feel and understand life and the sources of its power than to establish boundaries or limits of its manifestation.' Indeed, by using universal, typical phrases such as 'public interest,' 'internal structure of the state,' 'implied right,' and 'obligation of the supreme power to protect all,' and 'general welfare and general well-being,' Shaw established that the police authorities may possess a broader set of tools to achieve their objectives. Southern state governments resorted to the help of the police to introduce laws limiting the use of property by slaves, for example, prohibiting slave owners from teaching their slaves to read. Later, after the abolition of slavery, they established unusual restrictions on private property rights, such as introducing a policy of strict racial segregation, which limited the sale of property to African Americans or their work activities in certain types of professions. The application of laws providing unequal protection of property and labor for African Americans once again demonstrates the understanding of property at that time. (See Cohen 1991; Lichtenshtein 1996; Weiner 1978; Woodward 1955.)