Denying any privileged status to private property, Hughes concluded that: the economic situation in the country may be the result of how a temporary restriction on the enforcement of contractual terms is reconciled with the true meaning and purpose of the article, and thus will not exceed the reserved right of the state to protect vital interests of society. Since this article of the contract is not an unconditional and wholly unlawful restriction of the state's protectionist policy, the legislative body must make decisions in such a way as not to violate legislative authority. In this regard, whether the policy is reasonable or unreasonable will be conducted by the legislative body, and the Court will not interfere. Already in 1934, when the Court was ready to abandon evaluating economic legislation and to refrain from litigation concerning property rights, the legislative body had already then asserted the necessity of "protecting vital interests of society." After Roosevelt's re-election to the presidency in 1936 and his attempts to "move" the Court in 1937, the Court had practically fully agreed with his reform program. No other decision so clearly illustrated the new approach in the activities of the Supreme Court as was done in the case of "United States v. Carolene Products" (1938). In this specific case, the company was sued under the "Milk Act of 1923," which prohibited the interstate sale of milk with added fat and oil, and it was considered as the sale of an "intentionally spoiled food product harmful to health." The company's attorneys argued that the law unlawfully restricted freedom of contract. Rejecting arguments in favor of property rights, the Court considered the law valid, as it believed the law was a fair instrument of state regulation necessary to protect public health. The decision itself would have been an ordinary, simple confirmation of the established police powers. However, the most important aspect of this case was not the decision itself, but the fourth footnote by Justice Stone, according to which the majority of the Court equated property rights with the bundle of sacred civil liberties guaranteed by the Bill of Rights.