Denying any privileged status to private property, Hughes concluded that:

The economic climate in the country may be a result of how a temporary restriction on the enforcement of contract conditions is coordinated with the true meaning and purpose of its article, and thus will not exceed the reserved right of the state to protect vital public interests.... Since this article of the contract is not an unconditional and completely unjustified limitation on the protectionist policy of the state, the legislative body should make decisions in such a way as not to violate the legislative authority.... In doing so, the reasonable or unreasonable policy will be conducted by the legislative body, and the Court will no longer be concerned with it. Even in 1934, when the Court was ready to refuse to review economic legislation and to adjudicate cases of property rights, the legislative body had already stated the need to "protect vital public interests". After Roosevelt's re-election as president in 1936 and his attempt to "remove" the Court in 1937, the Court had almost completely agreed with his reform program. No other decision so clearly illustrated the new approach of the Supreme Court as was done in the case of "United States v. Carolene Products Co." (1938). In this specific case, a company was sued under the 1923 "Non-Fat Milk Act", which prohibited interstate sales of milk with added fat and oil, considering it to be the sale of "intentionally spoiled food products harmful to health". The representatives of the company "Carolene Products" argued that the law unjustifiably limited freedom of contract. Rejecting arguments in favor of property rights, the Court considered the law valid because, in its opinion, it was a fair instrument of state regulation necessary for protecting public health. The decision itself would have been an ordinary and simple confirmation of established police powers. However, more importantly in this case was not the decision itself, but Justice Stone's fourth footnote, according to which most members of the Court shared the concepts of property rights and the bundle of sacred civil liberties guaranteed by the Bill of Rights.