Denying any privileged status to private property, Hughes concluded that:

The economic climate in the country could be a result of how temporary restrictions on the enforcement of contract conditions would be coordinated with the true meaning and purpose of its articles, and thus not exceed the reserved right of the state to protect vital public interests.... Since this article of the contract is not an unconditional and completely unjustified restriction on the protectionist policy of the state, the legislative body should make decisions so as not to violate the legislative authority.... In doing so, the reasonable or unreasonable policy will be conducted by the legislative body, and the Court will no longer concern itself with it. Even in 1934, when the Court was ready to refuse to evaluate economic legislation and to adjudicate cases on property rights, the legislative body had already stated the need to "protect vital public interests". After Roosevelt's re-election as President in 1936 and his attempt to "remove" the Court in 1937, the Court had almost completely agreed with his reform program. No other decision so clearly illustrated the new approach of the Supreme Court as was done in the case of "United States v. Carolina Products Company" (1938). In this specific case, a company was sued under the law on skim milk from 1923, which prohibited interstate sales of milk with added fat and oil, considering it to be the sale of "intentionally spoiled food products harmful to health". The representatives of the Carolina Products Company argued that the law unjustifiably restricted freedom of contract. Rejecting arguments in favor of property rights, the Court considered the law valid because, in its opinion, it was a fair instrument of state regulation necessary for protecting public health. The decision itself would have been an ordinary and simple confirmation of established police powers. However, more importantly in this case was not the decision itself, but Justice Stone's fourth footnote, according to which most members of the Court shared the concepts of property rights and the bundle of sacred civil liberties guaranteed by the Bill of Rights.