Representative of the Massachusetts Supreme Court, Lemuel Shaw supported legislative authority regarding regulation of property on Boston Harbor grounds and prohibiting construction beyond those boundaries, and spoke to police rights as follows:

We believe that this is an established standard arising from the very nature of a well-organized civil society, where every property owner, regardless of whether they possess exclusive right to it, manages it with all implied responsibility, so its use should not cause harm to others enjoying similar rights to derive pleasure from their own property or to the community as a whole. All property in this association... is either fully or partially owned by the government and may be subject to general rules necessary for achieving the common good and general welfare. Property rights, like all other social and customary rights, are subject to applicable limitations necessary to confirm that no others have been harmed by its use, as well as established law provisions, since legislative authority... may assume it is necessary and proper resolution. In conclusion, Shaw added: "It is much easier to feel and understand life and sources of its power than to establish limits or boundaries of its manifestation." Indeed, with the use of universal, typical phrases such as "public interest," "internal arrangement of state", "implied right" and "obligation of supreme authority to protect all" and "common good and general welfare" Shaw established that law enforcement agencies may dispose of a large set of tools in achieving their goals. Southern states' governments resorted to police assistance to introduce laws limiting the use of slave property, for example prohibiting slave owners from teaching their slaves to read. Later, after the abolition of slavery they introduced unusual restrictions on private property rights, for instance by introducing a policy of strict racial segregation that limited sale of property to African Americans or their labor on certain professions. The application of laws providing unequal protection for African American property and work once again demonstrates how property was understood at the time. (See Cohen 1991; Lichtstein 1996; Wiener 1978; Woodward 1955).