Denying any privileged status of private property, Hughes arrived at the conclusion that: The economic conjuncture in a country may be the result of how temporary restrictions on the enforcement of contractual obligations are coordinated with the true meaning and purpose of its articles, and thus will not exceed the reserved right of the state to protect vital interests of society.... As the article was not an unconditional and completely invalid restriction on the protectionist policy of the state, then the legislative body should make decisions so as not to violate legislative authority.... While conducting rational or irrational policy, the Supreme Court will not be concerned with this. Even in 1934, when the Court was ready to refuse to evaluate economic legislation and review cases related to property rights, the legislative body had already announced the need to "protect vital interests of society". After Roosevelt's re-election as President in 1936 and his attempt to "remove" the Supreme Court in 1937, the Court had practically agreed with its reform program. No other decision has clearly illustrated the new approach of the Supreme Court as it was done in the case of "United States v. Carolina Products Co." (1938). In this specific case, a company was brought to court under the law "On Defatted Milk" 1923, which prohibited interstate sale of milk with added fat and oil, considering it the sale of "intentionally spoiled food product harmful to health". The representatives of "Carolina Products Co." argued that the law unreasonably restricted contractual freedom. Rejecting arguments in favor of property rights, the Court considered the law valid, as it was deemed a fair tool of state regulation necessary for protecting public health. The decision itself would have been an ordinary and simple confirmation of established police powers. However, more importantly in this case was not the decision itself, but the fourth footnote of Justice Stone, according to which most members of the Court shared the concepts of property rights and the bundle of sacred civil liberties guaranteed by the Bill of Rights.