The representative of the Massachusetts Supreme Court, Lemuel Shaw, supported legislative authority dealing with territorial property regulation and prohibiting building construction outside the Boston harbor area. Regarding police rights, he stated: "We believe that it is a settled principle inherent in a well-organized civil society, where every owner of property, irrespective of whether they hold the exclusive right to it, disposes of it, and all the implied responsibilities involved in such disposition, so as not to cause harm to other people who also have the same right to enjoyment of their own property, nor to society as a whole. All property in this community... is either fully or partially owned by the government and can be subject to common rules necessary for achieving general welfare and overall well-being. Property rights, like all other social and customary rights, are subject to corresponding restrictions necessary to ensure that others have not been harmed from its use, as well as laws established by authority, since legislative power... may assume this is a necessary and prudent resolution. In conclusion, Shaw added: "It is much easier to feel and understand life and its sources of authority than it is to establish boundaries or limits to its manifestation". Indeed, when using universal phrases such as 'public interest', 'the internal arrangement of the state', 'implied right and duty of higher power to protect all' and 'general welfare and overall well-being', Shaw established that law enforcement agencies have a large set of tools at their disposal to achieve their goals. Governments in southern states relied on police to introduce laws limiting property use by slaves, for instance, banning slave owners from teaching slaves how to read. Later, after the abolition of slavery they introduced unique restrictions on private property rights, for example introducing the policy of strict racial segregation which limited African Americans' ownership or labor activities on certain professions. The application of laws ensuring unequal protection of property and labor by African Americans once again demonstrates what was understood as property back then (see Cohen 1991; Lichtstein 1996; Winick 1978; Woodward 1955).