Captain, please have mercy - he began to speak rather freely, suddenly addressing Nikodim Fyodorovich - take into account my situation... I am even willing to ask them for forgiveness if I made any mistakes on my part. I'm a poor and sick student, depressed by poverty. I used to be a student, but now I can no longer support myself, but I will receive money... My mother and sister are in the -th province. They'll send me some, and I... will pay back. My landlady is a kind woman, but she's so angry that I've lost my lessons and haven't paid for four months, not even sending me food... And I don't understand at all what this promissory note is! Now she's demanding payment from me on the basis of this loan, what am I supposed to do? - But it's not our business... - The clerk observed again.

- Let me, let me, I completely agree with you, but let me also explain myself, - Rascolnikov picked up again, addressing Nikodim Fyodorovich, but trying to address both him and Illya Petrovich as well, although the latter persistently pretended not to notice him, digging through papers and disdainfully ignoring him. - Let me explain that I've been living with her for about three years now, since my arrival from the province and before... before... anyway, why shouldn't I confess it? From the very beginning, I gave her a verbal promise that I would marry her daughter, a completely free promise... It was a girl... well, she even liked me... although I wasn't in love with her... to put it simply, youth, that is, I want to say that my landlady made me many loans then and I lived a rather carefree life...

- We don't need such intimate details from you, beggar, and there's no time for them anyway, - Illya Petrovich gruffly interrupted him with triumph, but Rascolnikov stopped him with passion, though it suddenly became very difficult for him to speak. - But let me, let me tell you some of the story... how it was and... in my turn... although it's unnecessary, I agree with you that it's not worth telling, - but a year ago this girl died of typhus, and I remained a tenant just as before, and when my landlady moved to her current apartment, she said to me... and said kindly... that she completely trusts me and everything... but that maybe I wouldn't want to give her this promissory note for 115 rubles, the total amount she considered owed by me. Please: she exactly said that as soon as I gave her this document, she would start crediting me again as much as I wanted, and that she would never, ever - these were her own words - use this document until I pay back myself... And now, when I've lost my lessons and have nothing to eat, she's sending it for collection. What am I supposed to say? 

- All these sensitive details, beggar, are none of our business, - Illya Petrovich brutally cut him off. - You should give a review and an undertaking, and what you were in love with and all those tragic events, we don't care about any of that.