The pain from the whip had subsided, and Raskolnikov forgot about the blow; one anxious and not entirely clear thought now occupied him exclusively. He stood and looked far away for a long time, carefully examining this place that was especially familiar to him. When he went to university, it often happened that on his way home, possibly dozens of times, he would stop right at this same spot, carefully gaze at this indeed magnificent panorama, and each time almost be amazed by one obscure and insoluble impression. An inexplicable chill always blew over him from this magnificent panorama; the spirit was mute and deaf to him, and for him this lush picture was filled with a dumbfounded and enigmatic feeling... He marveled every time at his own gloomy and mysterious impression and postponed solving it, not trusting himself, to the future. Suddenly he sharply remembered these former questions and perplexities of his, and it seemed to him that he had not inadvertently remembered them now. It even struck him as strange and wonderful that he stood on the same spot as before, as if he really imagined that he could think about the same things now as before, with the same themes and pictures that interested him... just so recently. Even a bit funny it seemed to him, and at the same time his chest was constricted with pain. Somewhere deep down, below, slightly visible underfoot, it suddenly seemed to him like all this former past, and former thoughts, and former problems, and former themes, and former impressions, and the entire panorama, and he himself, and everything... It seemed that he was flying somewhere upwards, and everything disappeared from his eyes. Having made one involuntary movement with his hand, he suddenly felt a double kopeck coin clenched in his fist. He relaxed his hand, carefully looked at the coin, took a swing, and threw it into the water; then turned around and went home. It seemed to him that he had cut himself off from everything and everyone with scissors in this very moment.