Here is the translation:

 Not what at all!" he said.

He stopped suddenly; a new and utterly unexpected yet extremely simple question simultaneously baffled him and pained him:

"If really it was all done intentionally, not by accident, if you truly had a definite and firm goal, how then did you still not even look in your wallet and don't know what you got, because of which you've been taking so much pain and went consciously for such a nasty, repulsive, low thing? Ah, you were just about to throw the wallet into the water along with all those things you haven't seen yet... How's that?"

Yes, it is like that; everything is just like that. He, in fact, already knew this and it wasn't a new question for him either; when they decided last night to go to their deaths, they did so without any hesitation or protest, as if such was only fitting, as if otherwise were impossible... Yes, he remembered all of this; perhaps just yesterday it wouldn't have been so decided in that moment when he sat above the chest and took out cases from it...

It is precisely because I am terribly ill, he finally grumbled to himself, I've tortured and tormented myself, and don't even know what I'm doing... Yesterday too, and the day before yesterday, and all this time I've been tormenting myself... And as soon as I get better... I won't torture myself anymore. Unless perhaps... I will completely not recover? Lord have mercy! How tiresome everything has become for me...

He kept walking without stopping. He wanted desperately to distract himself somehow but didn't know what to do or try anything.

A new, insurmountable feeling began to overpower him more and more with almost every passing minute: an endless and nearly physical aversion to everything around him, obstinate, malicious, hateful.

Every stranger he encountered seemed disgusting - disgusting their faces, their gait, their movements. He would like to slap someone just for talking to him...

He stopped suddenly when he stepped out onto the embankment of the Little Neva on Vasilevsky Island, near the bridge.