The pain from the lash had subsided, and Raskolnikov forgot about the blow; one disturbing and not very clear thought now occupied him exclusively. He stood there looking off into the distance for a long time and intently; this place was especially familiar to him. When he went to the university, it often happened, indeed usually and most frequently when returning home, that he would stop exactly at this same spot, intently scrutinize this really magnificent panorama, and almost wonder every time at one unclear and unresolved impression of his own. A completely inexplicable chill always seemed to waft from this magnificent panorama towards him; the spirit was silent and dull for him in relation to this sumptuous picture... He wondered each time at his own gloomy and mysterious impression, and put off finding a solution to it, not trusting himself, for later. Now suddenly he remembered all these earlier questions of his and confusions, and it seemed to him that he had not unexpectedly remembered them now. It was just one thing that struck him as wild and marvelous – that he had stopped at the very same spot once more, as if indeed really having imagined to himself that he might think just as he did before and be interested in exactly the same subjects and images that he had been interested in... still so recently. He almost felt like laughing, but at the same time his chest tightened painfully. Somewhere deep down, below, where you could barely make out under your feet, everything from his former past now appeared to him – and the old thoughts and tasks and themes, and impressions too – and all that panorama as well, and he himself – and all... it seemed like he was flying off somewhere upwards, and everything vanished in his eyes. He made one involuntary movement with his hand, suddenly felt the crumpled ruble coin stuck in his fist, released his hand, looked intently at the coin, shook out a flutter of his arm, threw it into the water, then turned around and went home to him. It seemed as if he had sliced himself off from everything and everyone with scissors just now.