226). Such actions were justified by what is called "police powers" of the state, or as Oliver Wendell Holmes, writing for the Supreme Court in the case "Hudson County Water Company v. McCarthy" (1908), referred to as "restrictions applicable to property, for the benefit of society as a whole." The concept of police powers has a long history in Anglo-Saxon law, first mentioned in 1187. In the 1760s, William Blackstone wrote that "By 'state police and economy,' I mean the proper regulation and internal organization of the state, through which people in the country, as members of a well-organized family, are obliged to follow the rules of good manners and decency, to help their neighbors, and to be orderly, industrious, and prudent in their intentions" (see Blackstone 1979, pp. 4, 162). In the 1827 case "Vanderbilt v. Adams," Judge Woodworth of the New York Supreme Court more thoroughly described police powers, stating: "The supreme power in society, therefore, may and should prescribe how private property rights can be used.... Police powers are based on implied rights and the obligation of the highest authority to protect all by means of statutory regulations, so that ultimately the welfare of the entire society is increased.... Such governmental power should exist in every well-ordered society." In the case "Society v. Algar" (1851), Lemuel Shaw, a representative of the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court, supported the legislative power dealing with the regulation of property ownership within Boston Harbor and prohibiting construction beyond this wharf, and he spoke of police powers as follows: "We consider this to be an established principle arising from the very nature of a well-ordered civil society, where every owner of property, regardless of whether he possesses an exclusive right to it or not, manages it with all the implied responsibility, so that its use should not cause harm to any other persons who have the same right to derive pleasure from using their own property, nor to society as a whole."