The representative of the Massachusetts Supreme Court, Lemuel Shaw, supported legislative authority regarding property regulation in Boston Harbor and restrictions on building outside this harbor, saying: "We consider it to be a settled rule, arising out of the very nature of a well-organized civil society, where every owner of property, whether he holds it exclusively or not, has the right to manage it with all the implied responsibility that its use should not injure others who have like rights in their own enjoyment, or the community at large. All property in this commonwealth... is either entirely or partially under the control of government, and may be subject to such general rules as are necessary for the public good and general welfare. Property rights, as well as all other social and customary rights, must also yield to such limitations as are required by the protection of others from harm, and to such established law provisions, as the legislative authority... can assume to be necessary and proper measures." Shaw concluded with: "It is much easier to feel and understand life and its sources than it is to establish limits or boundaries of its manifestation". Truly, in using universal and typical phrases like "public interest", "internal organization of the state", "implied right", and "the duty of government to protect all" and "common good and general welfare," Shaw established that law enforcement had a vast range of tools at their disposal. Southern states governments turned to police power to enforce laws limiting slave owners' use of property, for example by prohibiting them from teaching slaves how to read. Later, after emancipation they introduced unusual restrictions on private property rights, for example introducing strict racial segregation policies which limited African Americans' ability to purchase or rent homes, and restricted their labor in certain occupations. The enforcement of laws protecting unequal property and labor protections for African Americans only serves to demonstrate the understanding of property at that time. (see Cohen 1991; Lichterstein 1996; Wiener 1978; Woodward 1955).