Denying any privileged status of private property, Hughes concluded that:

The economic condition in the country may result from how a temporary restriction on enforcing contract conditions is coordinated with the true meaning and purpose of its articles, and thus will not exceed the reserved power of the state to protect vital interests of society.... As this article of the agreement is not unconditional and completely unauthoritative limitation of the state's protectionist policy, the legislative body must make decisions so as not to violate the legislative jurisdiction.... In doing so, a reasonable or unreasonable policy will be conducted by the legislative body, which the Court will no longer deal with. Even in 1934, when the Court was ready to refuse assessment of economic legislation and examination of lawsuits on property rights, the legislative body already stated the need "to protect vital interests of society." After Roosevelt's re-election as president in 1936 and his attempt to "dismiss" the Court in 1937, the Court had already almost agreed with his reform program. No other decision has so clearly illustrated the new approach of the Supreme Court as it was done in the case of the United States v. Carolene Products Company (1938). In this specific case, a company was sued under the 1923 "Non-Fat Milk Act," which prohibited interstate sale of milk with added fat and oil, considering it as the sale of "intentionally spoiled food product harmful to health." The representatives of the "Carolene Products" company argued that the law unreasonably restricted contract freedom. Rejecting arguments in favor of property rights, the Court found the law valid because, in its opinion, it was a fair instrument of state regulation necessary for protecting public health. The decision itself would have been an ordinary, simple confirmation of established police powers. However, more importantly in this case, not the decision itself, but Justice Stone's fourth footnote, according to which most members of the Court shared the concepts of property rights and a bundle of sacred civil liberties guaranteed by the Bill of Rights.