— My good sir, Captain, — he began rather carelessly, suddenly addressing Nickodim Fomich, — do take an interest in my situation… I am even ready to ask them for forgiveness, if I have neglected anything on my side. I am a poor and sick student, discouraged (he literally said, "discouraged") by poverty. I was a student, because now I cannot support myself, but I will get money… My mother and sister are in — th province. They will send me, and I… will pay. My landlady is a good woman, but she was so furious that I lost my lessons and haven't paid for four months, that she doesn't even send me food… I completely don't understand what this note is! Now she is demanding of me, by this loan note, that I pay her, judge for yourself! — But this is not our affair… — the clerk remarked again.

— Allow me, allow me, I completely agree with you, but allow me also to clarify, — Raskolnikov took up again, not addressing the clerk, but turning to Nickodim Fomich, but trying with all his strength to address Ilya Petrovich as well, though the latter was stubbornly pretending to rummage through papers and disregarding him scornfully, — allow me also to explain that I have been living with her for about three years, since I arrived from the provinces and before… before… in any case, why should I not confess, from the beginning I gave a promise that I would marry her daughter, a verbal promise, entirely free… It was a girl… in any case, she even liked me… though I wasn't in love… in short, youth, that is, I mean to say, that the landlady gave me a lot of credit then and I led partly such a life… I was very light-minded…

— You are not being asked for such intimate details, esteemed sir, and there is no time, — Ilya Petrovich roughly and triumphantly interrupted, but Raskolnikov warmly stopped him, though it was extremely hard for him suddenly to talk. — But allow me, allow me to tell you partly everything… how it happened and… in return… though this is unnecessary, I agree with you, to tell it… — but a year ago this girl died of typhus, and I remained a lodger as before, and the landlady, when she moved to her current apartment, told me… and she kindly told me… that she is completely confident in me and everything… but that if I would like to give her this loan note for one hundred and fifteen rubles, everything that she considered my debt. Allow me, she exactly said, that as soon as I give her this paper, she will credit me as much as she wants and that never, never, in return, — these were her own words — she would use this paper, as long as I myself pay… And now, when I have lost my lessons and have nothing, she is bringing it to collection… What shall I say now? — All these sensitive details, esteemed sir, have nothing to do with us, — Ilya Petrovich brutally cut in, — you must give a statement and obligation, and what you were in love and all these tragic incidents, have nothing to do with this.