— Forgive me, Captain, — he began rather boldly, suddenly addressing Nickodim Fomich, — please consider my situation... I am even willing to beg their forgiveness if I have erred on my part. I am a poor and sick student, disheartened (he actually said, "disheartened") by my poverty. I was once a student, but now I cannot support myself, yet I will get money... My mother and sister are in the —th gubernia. They will send for me, and I... will pay. My landlady is a good woman, but she has grown so angry that I have lost my lessons and have not paid for four months, so she does not even send me dinner... I completely do not understand what this loan note is! Now she demands from me, by this borrowed letter, that I pay her, judge for yourselves! — But this is not our affair... — the clerk remarked again.

— Allow me, allow me, I completely agree with you, but allow me also to explain, — Raskolnikov picked up again, not addressing the clerk but directly addressing Nickodim Fomich, yet trying as much as possible to also address Ilya Petrovich, though the latter stubbornly pretended to be searching through papers and disdainfully ignored him, — allow me, too, to explain that I have been living with her for about three years, since my arrival from the provinces and before... before... in any case, why should I not confess, from the beginning, I had given her a promise that I would marry her daughter, a verbal promise, completely free... It was a girl... in any case, she even liked me... though I was not in love... in a word, youth, that is, I mean to say, that the landlady gave me a lot of credit then, and I led a partly such life... I was very frivolous...

— You are not required to offer such intimate details, sir, and there is no time for it, — Ilya Petrovich rudely and triumphantly interrupted, but Raskolnikov warmly stopped him, though it was extremely hard for him to speak suddenly. — But allow me, allow me to tell you, partly, everything... how it happened and... in my turn... although it is unnecessary, I agree with you, to tell, — but a year ago this girl died of typhus, and I remained as a lodger, as before, and when the landlady moved to her present apartment, she told me... and she said kindly... that she was entirely confident in me and everything... but that if I would like, I could give her this loan note for one hundred and fifteen rubles, all that she considered as her debt to me. Allow me: she specifically said that, as soon as I gave this paper, she would again lend me as much as I wanted and that, in her own words, she would never, never use this paper, as long as I myself paid... And now, when I have lost my lessons and have nothing to offer, she is demanding it for collection. What shall I say now? — All these sensitive details, sir, have nothing to do with us, — Ilya Petrovich rudely cut in, — you must give your statement and commitment, and what you were in love and all these tragic episodes, have nothing to do with us.