The pain from the whip had subsided, and Raskolnikov had forgotten about the blow; one restless and not quite clear thought now occupied him exclusively. He stood and gazed into the distance for a long and attentive time; this place was especially familiar to him. When he walked to the university, it was usually—more often than not, when returning home—that he happened to stop exactly at this same spot, gazing intently at this truly magnificent panorama and was almost surprised each time by one obscure and unsolvable impression of his own. An inexplicable coldness always seemed to blow upon him from this magnificent panorama; this lush picture was full of a silent and deaf spirit… He marveled each time at his gloomy and enigmatic impression and postponed solving it, distrustful of himself, to the future. Suddenly, he sharply remembered these former questions and uncertainties of his, and it seemed to him that he had not unintentionally recalled them now. It seemed strange and strange to him that he had stopped at the same spot again, as before, as though he had indeed imagined that he could think about the same thing now, as before, and be interested in the same old themes and pictures as he had been interested in… only so recently. Even almost laughably to him it became at the same time, while something pressed painfully on his chest. In some depth, below, somewhere barely visible under his feet, it seemed to him now all this old past, these old thoughts, these old tasks, these old themes, these old impressions, and this whole panorama, and himself, and everything, everything… It seemed as if he was flying somewhere upward and everything was disappearing from his eyes… Making one involuntary movement with his hand, he suddenly felt a double grivna coin gripped in his fist. He uncurled his hand, looked intently at the coin, swung his arm, and threw it into the water; then turned around and walked home. It seemed to him as if he had cut himself off from all and everything at that moment with scissors.