— Forgive me, Captain, — he began rather carelessly, suddenly addressing Nicholai Fomin, — consider my situation… I am even ready to ask them for forgiveness, if I have been at fault on my side. I am a poor and sick student, depressed (he actually said, "depressed") by poverty. I was a student, because now I cannot support myself, but I will get money… My mother and sister are in — th province. They will send me, and I… will pay. My landlady is a good woman, but she became so angry that I lost my lessons and haven't paid for the fourth month, so she doesn't even send me dinner… And I completely don't understand what this promissory note is! Now she is demanding from me, by this loan note, that I pay her, judge for yourselves! — But this is none of our business… — the clerk remarked again…

— Allow me, allow me, I completely agree with you, but allow me also to explain, — took up Raskolnikov again, addressing not the clerk but entirely Nicholai Fomin, yet trying with all his might to address also Ilya Petrovich, though the latter obstinately pretended to be searching through papers and disdainfully ignored him, — allow me also to explain from my side that I have been living with her for about three years, since my arrival from the provinces and before… before… in any case, why should I not confess from the start that I gave a promise, verbal, completely free, that I would marry her daughter… It was a girl… in any case, she even liked me… though I wasn't in love… in a word, youth, that is, I mean to say, that the landlady gave me a lot of credit then, and I led partly such a life… I was very frivolous…

— You are not required to provide such intimate details, sir, and there's no time for it, — Ilya Petrovich roughly and triumphantly interrupted, but Raskolnikov warmly stopped him, though it was extremely hard for him suddenly to speak. — But allow me, allow me to tell you partly everything… how it happened and… in turn… although it's unnecessary, I agree with you, to tell, — but a year ago this girl died of typhus, and I remained a lodger as before, and when the landlady moved to her present apartment, she told me… and she told me friendly… that she completely trusted me and everything… but that whether I would like to give her this loan note for one hundred and fifteen rubles, all that she considered as my debt. Allow me: she exactly said that as soon as I give this paper, she would again credit me as much as I wanted and that never, never, in turn—these were her own words—she would use this paper, as long as I myself pay… And now, when I have lost my lessons and have nothing to offer, she is already demanding it for collection… What shall I say now? — All these sensitive details, sir, have nothing to do with us, — rudely cut in Ilya Petrovich, — you must give your testimony and an undertaking, and what you were in love and all these tragic details, we have nothing to do with.