226). Such actions were justified by what is called "police powers" of the state, or as Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr., writing for the Supreme Court in the case "Hudson County Water Company v. McCarthy" (1908), referred to as "restrictions applicable to property, for the benefit of society as a whole." The concept of police powers has a long history in Anglo-Saxon law, first mentioned in 1187. In the 1760s, William Blackstone wrote that "By the state's police and economy, I mean the proper regulation and internal organization of the state, through which people within the country, like members of a well-organized family, are obligated to follow rules of civility and good manners, to help their neighbors, and to be decent, industrious, and law-abiding in their intentions" (see Blackstone 1979, p. 4, 162). In the 1827 case "Vanderbilt v. Adams," Judge Woodworth of New York State more thoroughly described police powers, saying: "The sovereign power in society, therefore, may and should prescribe how private rights to property may be used... Police powers are based on implied rights and the obligations of the sovereign authority to protect all through established legal enactments, so that in the end the general welfare of society is increased... Such governmental authority should exist in every well-regulated society." In the case "Society v. Algar" (1851), Lemuel Shaw, a representative of the Supreme Court of Massachusetts, supported the legislative authority dealing with the regulation of property in the Boston Harbor area and prohibiting construction beyond this wharf, and spoke of police powers as follows: "We consider this to be an established principle arising from the very nature of a well-ordered civil society, where every owner of property, regardless of whether he possesses an exclusive right to it or not, exercises it with all the implied responsibility so that its use should not cause harm to any other person who possesses the same right to enjoy the use of their own property, nor to society as a whole."