"United States v. Carolina Products" (1938), and "United States v. Darby" (1941), were prototypes of the judicial decisions of the 1930s, which, in fact, became the cause of the spread of judicial pragmatism and an instrumental approach to property rights. Most remarkable was the judicial decision of 1934 in the case "Home Building & Loan Association v. Blaisdell," in which the Supreme Court, due to the prevailing economic instability in the country, approved the state's actions in regulating property. The Court upheld the law of Minnesota; this law imposed a moratorium on the right to redeem mortgaged property under conditions of a designated adverse economic situation. Speaking on behalf of the Court, Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes stated that the Constitution article limiting state regulation should not be "considered with literal accuracy as any mathematical formula, but it remains one of the main articles of the Constitution, the interpretation of which is possible only with the presence of additional information." He added that the Court should interpret this article "only in accordance with the reserved right of the state to protect the vital interests of its citizens." "The effectiveness of the legislative body's activities should not be evaluated by whether its actions have a direct or indirect impact on the conditions of the contract, but rather by whether the solution proposed is lawful and whether it was achieved by reasonable and appropriate methods." This indicates a social and instrumental approach to defining property, which, in turn, was transformed into a constitutional principle. Denying any privileged status to private property, Hughes concluded that:
The economic situation in the country may be a result of how a temporary limitation on the enforcement of contract terms is reconciled with the true meaning and purpose of its article, thus not going beyond the reserved right of the state to protect the vital interests of society. Since this article of the contract is not an unconditional and entirely unlawful restriction of the state's protective policy, the legislative body must make decisions in such a way as not to violate legislative authority. In this regard, whether the legislative body conducts a reasonable or unreasonable policy, the Court will not concern itself.