Representative of the Massachusetts Supreme Court Lemuel Shaw supported the legislative authority, dealing with the regulation of property on Boston Harbor territory and prohibiting building construction outside this harbor, and spoke about police rights in the following way:

We believe that this is an established standard arising from the very essence of a well-organized civil society where every property owner, regardless of whether he or she has exclusive right to it, manages it with all implied responsibility so that its use does not cause harm to other people possessing the same right to enjoy their own property or the entire society. All property in this commonwealth is either wholly or partially owned by the government and may be subject to those general rules necessary for achieving the common good and overall welfare. Property rights, like all other social and conventional rights, are subject to the corresponding restrictions required to confirm that no others were harmed by its use, and to the established law-based rules since legislative authority... may assume this is a necessary and sensible decision. In conclusion, Shaw added: "It's much easier to feel and understand life and sources of its power than setting boundaries or limits for its manifestations." 

Indeed, when using universal standard phrases like "public interest", "the internal workings of the state," "implied right" and "the obligation of supreme authority to protect all" and "common good and general welfare," Shaw established that law enforcement agencies may dispose a vast set of tools in achieving their goals. Governments of southern states turned to police aid for introducing laws limiting the use of property by slaves, for example prohibiting slave owners from teaching their slaves how to read. Later, after the abolition of slavery they established unusual restrictions on private property rights, for instance introducing strict racial segregation policies that limited African Americans' access to selling properties or engaging in certain occupations. The application of laws ensuring unequal protection of property and labor for African Americans once again demonstrates what understanding of property was present at the time. (See Cohen 1991; Lichtstein 1996; Wiener 1978; Woodward 1955).