226). Such actions were justified by what is called "police powers" of the state, or as Oliver Wendell Holmes, writing for the Supreme Court in the case "Hudson County Water Company v. McCartner" (1908), referred to as "restrictions applicable to property for the benefit of society as a whole." The concept of police powers has a long history in Anglo-Saxon law, first mentioned in 1187. In the 1760s, William Blackstone wrote that "By state police and economy I mean the proper regulation and internal organization of the state, through which people in the country, like members of a well-organized family, are obligated to follow rules of decency and good manners, to help their neighbors, and to be respectable, industrious, and tractable in their intentions" (see Blackstone 1979, p. 4, 162). In the 1827 case "Vanderbilt v. Adams," Judge Woodworth of the New York State Supreme Court more thoroughly described police powers, stating: "The sovereign power in society, therefore, may and should prescribe how private rights to property may be used... Police powers are based on implied rights and the obligation of the sovereign power to protect all by means of statutory regulations so that ultimately the welfare of the whole society is increased... Such governmental power should exist in every well-regulated society." In the case "Society v. Algar" (1851), Lemuel Shaw, a representative of the Massachusetts Supreme Court, supported the legislative power dealing with regulation of property ownership in the Boston harbor area and prohibiting construction of buildings beyond this wharf, and spoke about police powers as follows: "We consider this to be an established norm arising from the very nature of a well-organized civil society, where every owner of property, regardless of whether he possesses an exclusive right to it or not, manages it with the implied responsibility so that its use does not cause harm to other persons who also have a right to derive enjoyment from the use of their own property, nor to society as a whole."