226). Such actions were justified by what is called "police powers" of the state, or as Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr., writing for the Supreme Court in the case "Hudson County Water Company v. McCarthy" (1908), referred to as "restrictions applicable to property for the benefit of society as a whole." The concept of police powers has a long history in Anglo-Saxon law, first mentioned in 1187. In the 1760s, William Blackstone wrote that "By 'state police and economy,' I mean the proper regulation and internal organization of the state, through which people in the country, like members of a well-organized family, are obligated to follow the rules of propriety and good manners, to assist their neighbors, and to be orderly, industrious, and unassuming in their intentions" (see Blackstone 1979, p. 4, 162). In the 1827 case "Vanderbilt v. Adams," Justice Woodworth of the New York Supreme Court more precisely described police powers, stating: "The sovereign power in society, therefore, may and should prescribe how private rights to property may be used.... Police powers are based on implied rights and the obligations of the sovereign power to protect all through established legal regulations so that ultimately the welfare of the entire society is increased.... Such governmental power should exist in every well-regulated society." In the case "Society v. Algar" (1851), Lemuel Shaw, a representative of the Massachusetts Supreme Court, supported the legislative authority dealing with the regulation of property ownership in Boston Harbor and prohibiting construction of buildings beyond this wharf, and spoke of police powers as follows: "We consider this to be an established norm arising from the very essence of a well-organized civil society, where every owner of property, regardless of whether he possesses an exclusive right to it or not, exercises control over it with the entire implied responsibility so that its use should not cause harm to any other person who possesses a similar right to derive enjoyment from using their own property, nor to society as a whole."