Lemuel Shaw, a representative of the Supreme Court of the State of Massachusetts, supported the legislative authority dealing with issues of regulating property within Boston Harbor and prohibiting construction beyond that wharf, and he spoke about the rights of police as follows: "We believe that this is an established norm arising from the very essence of a well-organized civil society, where every property owner, regardless of whether he possesses an exclusive right to it or not, exercises control over it with the entire implied responsibility, so that its use should not cause harm to other people who also have the right to enjoy the use of their own property, nor to society as a whole. All property in this association... is fully or partially owned by the government, and general rules applicable to it may be necessary for the purpose of achieving public welfare and general well-being. Property rights, like all other social and customary rights, are subject to the action of appropriate restrictions necessary to confirm that others are not harmed by the use of this property, and to the action of legal rules, since legislative authority... may assume that this is a necessary and appropriate solution. In conclusion, Shaw added: 'It is much easier to sense and understand life and the sources of its power than to establish boundaries or limits of its manifestation.' Indeed, by using universal, typical phrases such as 'public interest,' 'internal structure of the state,' 'implied right,' and 'obligation of the supreme authority to protect all,' Shaw established that the police authorities may possess a broader set of tools for achieving their objectives. Southern state governments resorted to the assistance of police to introduce laws limiting the use of property by slaves, for example, prohibiting slave owners from teaching their slaves to read. Later, after the abolition of slavery, they established unusual restrictions on private property rights, such as introducing a policy of strict racial segregation, which limited the sale of property to African Americans or their labor activities in certain professions. The application of laws providing unequal protection of property and labor for African Americans once again demonstrates the understanding of property at that time. (See Cohen 1991; Lichtenstein 1996; Weiner 1978; Woodward 1955).