226). Such actions were justified by what is called "police power" of the state, or what Oliver Wendell Holmes, writing for the Supreme Court in the case "Hudson County Water Company v. McCarther" (1908), referred to as "limitations applicable to property for the benefit of society as a whole." The concept of police power has a long history in Anglo-Saxon law, first mentioned in 1187. In the 1760s, William Blackstone wrote that "By state police and economy, I mean the proper regulation and internal organization of the state, through which people in the country, like members of a well-organized family, are obliged to follow rules of propriety and good breeding, to help their neighbors, and to be orderly, industrious, and tractable in their intentions" (see Blackstone 1979, pp. 4, 162). In the 1827 case "Vanderbilt v. Adams," Judge Woodworth of the New York State Supreme Court more thoroughly described police power, stating: "The sovereign power in society, therefore, may and should prescribe how private rights to property can be used.... Police power is based on implied rights and the obligations of the sovereign power to protect all by means of established legal regulations so that ultimately the welfare of the whole society increases.... Such governmental power should exist in every well-regulated society." In the case "Society v. Algar" (1851), Lemuel Shaw, a representative of the Massachusetts Supreme Court, supported the legislative power dealing with regulation of property ownership in the Boston harbor and prohibiting construction of buildings beyond this wharf, and spoke of police power as follows: "We consider this to be an established norm arising from the very essence of a well-organized civil society, where each owner of property, regardless of whether they possess exclusive rights to it, manages it with the implied responsibility so that its use does not harm either other people who have the same right to enjoy the use of their own property, or society as a whole."