Representative Lemuel Shaw of the Massachusetts Supreme Court supported the legislative authority dealing with issues of regulating property within the Boston Harbor and prohibiting construction of buildings beyond this wharf, and regarding the rights of the police, he stated as follows: "We consider this to be an established norm arising from the very essence of a well-organized civil society, where every property owner, regardless of whether he possesses an exclusive right to it or not, manages it with the entire implied responsibility so that its use should not cause harm to other people who also have the right to derive enjoyment from the use of their own property, nor to the whole society as a whole. All property in this community... is entirely or partially owned by the government, and general rules applicable to it may be necessary for achieving the general welfare and overall prosperity. Property rights, like all other social and customary rights, are subject to the action of appropriate restrictions necessary to confirm that others have not suffered from the use of this property, and to the action of established legal rules, since legislative authority... may assume that this is a necessary and reasonable solution." In conclusion, Shaw added: "It is much easier to feel and understand life and the sources of its power than to establish boundaries or limits of its manifestation." Indeed, by using universal, typical phrases such as "public interest," "internal structure of the state," "implied right," and "obligation of the supreme authority to protect all," Shaw established that police organs may have a broader set of tools for achieving their goals. Southern state governments resorted to the help of the police to introduce laws restricting the use of property by enslaved people, for example, prohibiting slaveholders from teaching their slaves to read. Later, after the abolition of slavery, they imposed unusual restrictions on private property rights, such as introducing a policy of strict racial segregation, which limited the sale of property to African Americans or their ability to work in certain professions. The application of laws providing unequal protection of property and labor rights for African Americans once again demonstrates the understanding of property at that time. (See Cohen 1991; Lichtenstein 1996; Weiner 1978; Woodward 1955.)