Here is the translated text:

...the United States v. Carolene Products (1938) and the United States v. Darby (1941) were precedents for court judgments of the 1930s that ultimately led to the spread of judicial pragmatism and an instrumental approach to property rights. Notable among these was a judgment from 1934, in Home Building and Loan Association v. Blaisdell, in which the Supreme Court, taking into account the nation's economic instability at the time, sanctioned government action regarding regulation of property. The court upheld a Minnesota state law; this law imposed a moratorium on foreclosure due to an unfavorable economic situation determined by law. Speaking for the court, Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes stated that Article I of the Constitution, which restricts government regulation, "is not to be construed with absolute accuracy like any mathematical formula, but remains one of the principal articles of the Constitution." He added that the Court should interpret it according to a state's reserved power "to protect vital interests of its citizens." The Chief Justice stressed that the Court should assess the efficiency of a legislative decision in terms not of its direct or indirect impact on contract conditions but whether it is a lawful decision reached through reasonable and suitable means. This reflects both social and instrumental approaches to determining property, which have been transformed into constitutional principles. Disregarding any privileged status for private property, Hughes concluded that: The state's economic condition can be an effect of temporary restrictions on compulsory enforcement of contract conditions, being coordinated with the true meaning and purpose of its article, and thereby not going beyond a reserved power of the state to protect vital interests of society.... Given this contractual article is not unconditional and entirely impermissible as a protective policy by the state, then legislative bodies must decide in such a manner that they do not violate constitutional legality.... The Court will consider neither wise nor unwise decisions made by it.