Here is the translated text:

—"Please have mercy, captain," he began quite boldly, suddenly addressing Nikodim Fyodorovich — "take a close look at my situation... I'm willing to even apologize to them if I was somehow in error on my part. I'm a poor and ill student, depressed (he said as much: 'depressed') by poverty. I used to be a student, but now I can't support myself, but I will receive money... My mother and sister live in the – governorate. They'll send it to me, and I... will pay back. My landlady is a kind woman, but she's gotten so upset that I've lost my lessons and haven't paid for four months, not even getting sent food... And I simply don't understand this promissory note! Now she's demanding payment from me because of this loan letter... What am I to do? — But this is none of our concern...

—"Allow me, allow me," Rascolnikov picked up again, addressing not the secretary but Nikodim Fyodorovich, while trying with all his might also to address Ilia Petrovich, who was stubbornly pretending to dig through papers and contemptuously ignoring him — "allow me to explain on my side as well, that I've lived with her for almost three years now, since arriving from the province and before... before... anyway, why not tell the truth, from the very start I made a verbal promise to marry her daughter. It was a girl... anyway, she even liked me... although I wasn't in love... to put it briefly, youth is what I'm saying, that is, my landlady used to lend me money and I lived somewhat recklessly...

— "We're not asking for such intimate details, savior of the poor," Ilia Petrovich coarsely and triumphantly interrupted, but Rascolnikov with passion stopped him, although it became incredibly hard for him suddenly to speak — "But allow me, allow me to explain, at least in part... how things were and... on my side... though this is extra, I agree with you, to tell the story... — But last year that girl died of typhus, and I remained a boarder as before. And when our landlady moved into her current apartment, she said to me... and said in a friendly way... that she's completely confident in me and everything will be all right... but that maybe I wouldn't want to give her this loan letter for 115 rubles, which is the total amount she considered my debt. She said explicitly that as soon as I give her this document, she'll start lending me money again as much as I need and that under no circumstances — these were her own words — will she use this paper until I pay back myself... And now, when I've lost my lessons and have nothing to eat, she's brought it to collection. What am I to say? 

—"All these sensitive details, savior of the poor, are none of our concern," Ilia Petrovich brutally cut off Rascolnikov — "you need to give us a review and a commitment, and what you were or weren't in love with is entirely beside the point."