Not what I thought it would be!

Suddenly he stopped; a completely unexpected and extremely simple question had struck him and shocked him bitterly:

"If indeed this whole thing was done consciously, not carelessly, if you really had a definite and firm goal, then how did you not even glance at the wallet and don't know what you got, due to which all suffering you took on and deliberately went for such a vile, disgusting, low deed? You would now throw the wallet into the water along with all the things you haven't seen yet... How is this?"

Yes, it's like that; it's all true. He, however, had known this already and didn't find it to be a new question for him; and when it was decided to throw everything into the water at night, it was done without any hesitation or objection, as if that was just how it should be, as if it couldn't be otherwise... Yes, he knew all of this and remembered it well; did he almost decide on this yesterday itself, in that moment when he sat over the trunk and pulled out cases from it... And so! 

"This is because I'm very sick," he decided gloomily at last. "I've exhausted and tormented myself, and don't even know what I'm doing... I tortured myself yesterday, and the day before yesterday, and all this time... I'll get well and... won't torment myself anymore... But what if I don't recover completely? Lord! How it's all gotten on my nerves!"

He walked without stopping. He desperately wanted to somehow dissipate himself, but he didn't know what to do or what to try. A new, insurmountable feeling was taking hold of him more and more almost with every minute: an endless, almost physical aversion to everything that met his eyes and surrounded him, persistent, malicious, hateful. All the people he encountered were revolting to him - their faces, gait, movements were repulsive. He would have just spat on someone if they spoke to him...

He stopped suddenly when he came out onto the embankment of the Little Neva River, on Vasilyevsky Island, by the bridge.