— Forgive me, Captain, — he began rather boldly, suddenly addressing Nicholas Fomin — please consider my situation… I am even ready to ask them for forgiveness, if I have erred on my part. I am a poor and sick student, disheartened (he actually said, "disheartened") by poverty. I was a student, because now I cannot support myself, but I will get money… My mother and sister are in the province. They will send me, and I… will pay. My landlord is a good woman, but she has become so angry that I lost my lessons and haven't paid for the fourth month, so she doesn't even send me food… And I don't at all understand what this promissory note is! Now she is demanding from me, by this loan note, that I pay her, judge for yourselves! — But this is none of our business… — the clerk remarked again…

— Allow me, allow me, I entirely agree with you, but allow me also to explain, — Raskolnikov interjected again, not addressing the clerk, but rather turning to Nicholas Fomin, yet striving with all his might to also address Ilya Petrovich, though the latter stubbornly pretended to be searching through papers and disdainfully ignored him — allow me also to explain from my side that I have been living with her for nearly three years, since my arrival from the province and before… before… in any case, why shouldn't I confess, from the very beginning I gave her a promise that I would marry her daughter, a verbal promise, entirely free… She was a girl… in any case, she even liked me… though I wasn't in love… in a word, youth, that is, I mean to say, that the landlord gave me a lot of credit then and I led partly such a life… I was very reckless…

— You are not required to provide such intimate details, sir, and there's no time for it, — Ilya Petrovich rudely and triumphantly interrupted, but Raskolnikov warmly stopped him, although it was extremely hard for him suddenly to speak. — But allow me, allow me to tell you partly everything… how it happened and… in turn… although it's unnecessary, I agree with you, to tell it — but a year ago this girl died of typhus, and I remained as a lodger, as before, and when the landlord moved to her present apartment, she told me… and she told me kindly… that she was completely confident in me and everything… but that whether I would like to give her this loan note for one hundred and fifteen rubles, all that she considered as my debt. Allow me, she exactly said, that as soon as I give this paper, she would again credit me as much as I wanted and that, in turn, — these were her exact words — she would never use this paper, as long as I myself pay… And now, when I have lost my lessons and have nothing, she is already demanding it for collection… What shall I say now? — All these sensitive details, sir, have nothing to do with us, — Ilya Petrovich rudely cut in — you must give your statement and undertaking, and what you were in love and all these tragic matters, we have nothing to do with.