Quite the opposite!...

Suddenly he stopped; a new, completely unexpected and extremely simple question immediately threw him off and greatly surprised him:

"If indeed all this was done deliberately, not foolishly, if you really had a definite and firm goal, then how come you haven't even looked into the wallet yet and don't know what you've gotten, for which you've endured all these sufferings and deliberately went along with such a low, nasty, despicable deed? Indeed, you wanted to throw it into the water now, the wallet, along with all the things you hadn't even seen yet… What's going on?"

Yes, that's true; everything is like that. He, however, had known this before, and it was by no means a new question for him; and when it was decided at night to throw it into the water, it was decided without any hesitation or objection, as if that was the way it should be, as if there was no other way it could be… Yes, he knew all this and remembered everything; indeed, perhaps it was already decided yesterday, at the very moment when he was sitting over the chest and taking out the cases from it… Oh, that's true!… 'It's because I'm very ill,' he decided gloomily at last, 'I've tortured and torn myself apart, and I don't even know what I'm doing… And yesterday, and the day before, and all this time I've been tormenting myself… I'll recover and… stop tormenting myself… What if I never recover at all? Lord! How tired I am of all this!…' He walked without stopping. He desperately wanted to somehow relieve himself, but he didn't know what to do or what to take action. A single new, inescapable feeling was taking hold of him more and more, almost with every minute: it was some kind of endless, almost physical repulsion towards everything he had encountered and the surrounding environment, persistent, spiteful, hateful. Everything he met was repulsive to him—repulsive were their faces, their gait, their movements. He would have just spat on someone, perhaps even bitten them, if someone had spoken to him… He suddenly stopped when he reached the embankment of the Small Neva, on the Vasilievsky Island, near the bridge.