Not at all!..”

He suddenly stopped; a new, completely unexpected and extremely simple question simultaneously bewildered him and pained him:

“If it was indeed done consciously, not stupidly, if you really had a definite and firm goal, then how did you not even glance into your wallet and do not know what you got, because of which you took all the trouble and deliberately went to such a low, disgusting deed? You wanted to throw the wallet into the water now, together with all the things you haven’t seen yet... How is this?"

Yes, it's like that; it's all like that. However, he knew it before, and this was not a new question for him; and when they decided to throw everything into the water at night, they decided without any hesitation or objection, as if this should be so, as if otherwise it would be impossible... Yes, he knew all this and remembered it well; maybe it wasn't even yesterday that they decided like this, in that very moment when he was sitting over the trunk and rummaging through the cases from it... And indeed! "This is because I am very sick," he finally decided grimly, "I myself have tormented and tortured myself, and do not know what I'm doing... I've been tormenting myself for two days now, and all this time I've been torturing myself... I'll get well up and... won't torture myself anymore... But what if I don't get well at all? God! How tired I am of it all!"

He walked without stopping. He terribly wanted to distract himself somehow, but he didn’t know what to do or what to try. One new, insurmountable feeling was taking over him more and more with almost every minute: it was some kind of endless, almost physical disgust for everything that met him and surrounded him, persistent, malevolent, hateful.

He felt disgusted by all the people he encountered – their faces, gait, movements. He wouldn't care about anyone, he would bite them, if only someone spoke to him...

He suddenly stopped when he came out onto the embankment of the Little Neva on Vasilyevsky Island, near the bridge.