The pain of the whip had subsided, and Raskolnikov forgot about the blow; one anxious and not quite clear thought now occupied him exclusively. He stood there gazing out into the distance for a long time, intently; this place was especially familiar to him. When he went to university, it happened to him, perhaps ten times, that on his way home, he would stop at exactly this same spot, gaze intently at this truly magnificent panorama, and each time almost be amazed by one vague and insoluble impression of his own. An inexplicable chill always blew in from this magnificent panorama; the spirit was mute and deaf for him, and full of a lush picture... He marveled every time at his gloomy and enigmatic impression and put off solving it, not trusting himself to do so, until later. Now suddenly he recalled these old questions and doubts, and it seemed to him that he had not recalled them by chance. One thing struck him as strange and wonderful: he had stopped at the same spot as before, just like he really had imagined that he could think about the very same things now, with the same themes and pictures of interest that he had been interested in... just so recently. He almost felt a laugh rising up inside him, but it also constricted his chest to the point of pain. In some depth, below, somewhere slightly visible beneath his feet, everything from this past seemed to appear before him now: all his old thoughts, and old problems, and old themes, and old impressions, and the whole panorama, and he himself, and everything... It seemed as though he was flying up somewhere, and everything disappeared from his eyes. Having made a involuntary movement with his hand, he suddenly felt a two-kopeck coin clenched in his fist. He relaxed his hand, looked intently at the coin, swung it back and forth, and then threw it into the water; after that, he turned around and went home. It seemed to him as though he had just cut himself off with scissors from everything and everyone in this moment.