Denying any privileged status to private property, Hughes concluded that: 
The economic situation in the country may result from how temporary restrictions on the enforcement of contract conditions are coordinated with the true meaning and purpose of their articles, and thus will not exceed the reserved rights of the state to protect vital interests of society.... Since this article is not unconditional and completely invalid limitation of state protectionism policy, then the legislative body must make decisions in such a way as not to violate legal authority.... While the legislative body may conduct reasonable or unreasonable policy, it is none of the court's business. Even in 1934, when the court was ready to abstain from evaluating economic legislation and delimiting cases of property rights, the legislative body already claimed that they needed to "protect vital interests of society." After Roosevelt's re-election as president in 1936 and his attempt to remove the court in 1937, the court had almost completely agreed with his reform program. No other decision so clearly illustrated the new approach of the Supreme Court than did in the case "United States v. Carolene Products" (1938). In this particular case, companies were sued under the 1923 law on skimmed milk, which banned interstate sale of milk with added fat and oil, considering it a sale of "intentionally spoiled food harmful to health." The representatives of Carolene Products claimed that the law unfairly restricted freedom of contract. Rejecting arguments in favor of property rights, the Court found the law valid, as they believed it was a fair tool of state regulation necessary for protecting public health. In itself, the adopted decision would have been an ordinary, simple confirmation of established police powers. However, more importantly in this case was not the decision itself but the fourth footnote of Justice Stone, according to which most members of the Court shared the concepts of property rights and a bundle of sacred civil freedoms guaranteed by the Bill of Rights.