Destined by nature to play the role of "lords of fate," they boldly rose up against the existing order while simultaneously brazenly violating universally accepted moral norms, not hesitating to resort to violence and crime in order to impose their will upon humanity. Condemned by their contemporaries, these "extraordinary people" were later vindicated by posterity, which recognized them as heroes of history and benefactors of mankind. From this individualistic, anarchistic system of ideas, a system which he not only thought through in solitude but also outlined in a newspaper article a year before committing the murder, arises the dilemma which Raskolnikov formulates in words: "Am I a worm like all others, or a man?" "Am I a trembling creature or have I a right?" 

The hero of "Crime and Punishment" — and this is one of the reasons for his tragic misunderstanding — does not seriously consider why thousands and millions of laborers in past epochs and in his own time were not capable of historical creativity, could not actively protest and struggle against unjust living conditions. His consciousness of their past and present submission provokes both his anger and sorrow, yet at the same time impels him to elevate himself in his own eyes to an immeasurable height, to oppose himself to the masses, to the people, to the ordinary, common people. Raskolnikov does not wish — unlike most of the people he observes — to silently obey and endure, and this moral intransigence of the hero impresses both the author and the reader of the novel. But from this, according to Raskolnikov's view, only one conclusion is possible — he must prove to himself and to others that, like other "extraordinary" historical personalities, he is not "a trembling creature," but a born "lord of fate," possessing the right to transgress elementary moral laws and norms, recognized as unbreakable by ordinary, common people. This conclusion leads Raskolnikov to his crime, which he considers a test necessary to determine whether he belongs to the race of "extraordinary" people or whether he remains to obey and endure, like others, ordinary weak natures. By committing his crime, Raskolnikov challenges the world of social inequality and the suppression of human individuality. At the same time (though the hero of Dostoevsky is not aware of this), his "idea" immortalizes the inhumanity of the existing order of things. The inequality between the strong and the weak, between the predators and the oppressed, forming the basis of class society and the state, remains for Raskolnikov in his reflections an eternal model of any human coexistence.