Here is the translation of the text into English:

"... 'United States v. Carolene Products' (1938) and 'United States v. Darby' (1941) were prototypes of 1930s court decisions that would lead to a proliferation of judicial pragmatism and instrumentalism in property rights approaches. Most notable was the 1934 decision in Home Building & Loan Assn v Blaisdell, in which the Supreme Court, taking into account the economic instability prevailing in the country, endorsed state actions aimed at regulating property ownership. The court upheld the Minnesota statute; the law put a moratorium on forced sale of pledged property under legislatively established adverse economic conditions. Speaking for the Court, Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes stated that the Constitution's article limiting government regulation should not be viewed 'with mathematical exactness as if any formula', but remains one of its main articles, the interpretation of which could only rely on additional information. He added that the Court would only interpret this article in accordance with the reserved right of a state to protect its residents' vital interests. 'Assessing the legislative body's effectiveness should not be done by examining direct or indirect impacts it may have on contract conditions, but whether a lawful decision has been made and reached using reasonable and proper means.' This reflects social and instrumental approach to determining property ownership, which in turn was converted into a constitutional principle. By rejecting any privileged status for private property, Hughes concluded that:

...The economic situation in the country may be due to the temporary restriction on involuntary fulfillment of contract conditions being coordinated with the true meaning and purpose of this article's clause, thus not exceeding the state's reserved right to protect the vital interests of society. As such an unconditional and absolutely unwarranted limitation on state protectionist policies cannot stand as valid in law, a legislative organ must act so that it does not undermine legislative validity.... In any case, what seems rational or irrational will be decided by the legislative body, not by the Court."