Denying any privileged status to private property, Hughes concluded that:

The economic situation in the country could be a result of how the temporary limitation on enforcement of the conditions of the contract is agreed upon with its true meaning and purpose, and, thus, will not exceed the reserved power of the state to protect vital interests of society.... Since the article of the contract is not an unconditional and absolutely unauthorized restriction on protectionist policies of the state, the legislative organ should make decisions so as not to violate legislative authority.... In this case, reasonable or unreasonable policy will be conducted by the legislative organ, and the Court will no longer have a say in it. As early as 1934, when the Court was already ready to refuse evaluating economic legislation and judging property rights issues in court cases, the legislative organ declared the need to "protect vital interests of society." After Roosevelt's re-election in 1936 and his attempt to "take away" the Court in 1937, the Court had practically agreed with his reform program. No other decision illustrated the new approach of the Supreme Court as clearly as that made in the case of "United States v. Carolene Products" (1938). In this specific case, a company was sued on the basis of the "Defatted Milk Law" 1923, which prohibited interstate sales of milk with added fat and oil, regarding it as sale of "deliberately spoiled food product harmful to health." Representatives of the Carolene Products Company argued that the law unreasonably restricted freedom of contract. Disregarding arguments about property rights, the Court considered the law valid because, in its opinion, it was a fair tool of government regulation necessary for protection of public health. The decision itself would have been a simple and ordinary confirmation of established police powers. However, the most important thing in this case was not the decision, but Judge Stone's footnote 4, which states that the majority of the Court members split concepts of property rights and cluster of sacred civil liberties guaranteed by the Bill of Rights.