Representative Lemuel Shaw of the Massachusetts Supreme Court supported the legislative authority dealing with issues of regulating property within Boston Harbor and prohibiting construction beyond this wharf, and regarding police powers, he said the following: "We consider this to be an established norm arising from the very essence of a well-organized civil society, in which every property owner, whether or not they possess an exclusive right to it, manages it with all the implied responsibility so that its use does not cause harm to other people who also have the right to enjoy the use of their property, nor to society as a whole. All property in this society... is either fully or partially owned by the government, and general rules applicable to achieving the public good and general welfare may be applied to it. Property rights, like all other social and customary rights, are subject to the applicable restrictions necessary to ensure that others are not harmed by the use of this property, and to the laws established by legislative authority, since the legislative power... may assume that this is a necessary and reasonable solution. In conclusion, Shaw added, "It is much easier to feel and understand life and the sources of its power than to establish boundaries or limits to its manifestations." Indeed, by employing universal, standard phrases such as "public interest," "internal structure of the state," "implied right," and "the obligation of supreme power to protect all," Shaw established that police authorities may wield a broader set of tools in achieving their objectives. Southern state governments resorted to the assistance of police powers to enact laws limiting the use of property by enslaved people, for example, prohibiting slaveholders from teaching their enslaved people to read. Later, after the abolition of slavery, they imposed unusual restrictions on private property rights, such as introducing a policy of strict racial segregation, which limited the sale of property to African Americans or their engagement in certain types of professions. The application of laws providing unequal protection of property and labor for African Americans further illustrates the understanding of property at that time. (See Cohen 1991; Lichtenstein 1996; Weiner 1978; Woodward 1955.)