The United States against Carolina Products (1938) and the United States against Darby (1941), were prototypes of the 1930s court decisions, which served as a reason for the spread of judicial pragmatism and an instrumental approach to property rights. The most notable decision was made in 1934 in the case Home Building & Loan Association v. Blaisdell. In response to economic instability in the country, the Supreme Court approved government actions regarding property regulation by endorsing Minnesota State's law; this law placed a moratorium on foreclosure of pledged property in circumstances determined by law to be economically unfavorable. In speaking for the court, Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes stated that the Article of the Constitution limiting state regulation should not "be considered with literal exactness as any mathematical formula, but still it remains one of the main Articles of the Constitution, which interpretation is possible only when additional information is present." He added that the Court should interpret this article merely "in accordance with the reserved right of the State to protect vital interests of its citizens". "Judging the effectiveness of a legislative act must not be by direct or indirect influence on contract conditions but whether there has been lawful made decision and if so, reached through reasonable and suitable methods." This speaks about the social and instrumental approach to determining property that in turn was converted into a constitutional principle. Disregarding any privileged status of private property, Hughes concluded that:

The state's economic condition can be a result of how temporary restriction on the enforcement of contract conditions will be coordinated with the true sense and purpose of its clause, and thus not exceed the reserved right of the State to protect vital interests of society... As this clause of the agreement is not an absolute and completely unjustifiable limitation of protectionist state policy, legislative organs must take decisions so as not to infringe upon the constitutional legitimacy.... Whether a reasonable or unreasonable policy will be conducted by the legislative organ, the Court will no longer pay attention to it.