226). Such actions were justified by what is termed "police powers" of the state, or as Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr., writing for the Supreme Court in the case of "Hudson County Water Company v. MacCartney" (1908), referred to as "restrictions applicable to property for the benefit of society as a whole." The concept of police powers has a long history in Anglo-Saxon law, first mentioned in 1187. In the 1760s, William Blackstone wrote that "By the term 'public police and economy,' I mean the proper regulation and internal organization of the state, through which individuals within the country, like members of a well-organized family, are obligated to abide by rules of decency and propriety, to assist neighbors, and to be upright, industrious, and tractable in their intentions" (see Blackstone 1979, pp. 4, 162). In the 1827 case "Vanderbilt v. Adams," Judge Woodworth of the New York State Court more extensively described the police powers, stating: "The sovereign authority in society, therefore, may and should prescribe how private rights to property may be used.... Police powers are based on implied rights and the obligations of the higher authority to protect all through established legal regulations so as ultimately to increase the well-being of society as a whole.... Such governmental power should be present in every well-regulated society." In the 1851 case "Society v. Alger," Lemuel Shaw, a justice of the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court, supported the legislative authority dealing with regulations of property ownership in the Boston harbor and prohibiting construction of buildings outside this dock, and spoke of police powers as follows: "We deem this an established principle arising from the very essence of a well-ordered civil society, where each property owner, regardless of whether he possesses an exclusive right to it or not, exercises control over it with all the implied responsibility so that its use may not injure either other persons who possess such a right to enjoy the use of their own property or society as a whole."