Representative Lemuel Shaw of the Massachusetts Supreme Court supported the legislative authority addressing issues of regulating property within Boston Harbor and prohibiting construction outside this port, and spoke on the rights of the police as follows: "We believe that this is an established norm arising from the very essence of a well-organized civil society, where each property owner, whether possessing exclusive rights to the property or not, exercises control over it with all the implied responsibility, so that its use does not cause harm to others who also possess the right to enjoy the use of their property, nor to society at large. All property in this society... fully or partially belongs to the government, and general rules applicable to it may be necessary for the achievement of the public good and general welfare. Property rights, like all other social and customary rights, are subject to the action of appropriate restrictions necessary to confirm that no one else has been harmed by the use of this property, as well as to the action of rules established by law, since the legislative authority... may assume that this constitutes a necessary and proper measure. In conclusion, Shaw added: 'It is much easier to feel and understand the life and sources of its power than to establish the limits or boundaries of its manifestation.' Indeed, by using universal, typical phrases such as 'public interest,' 'internal structure of the state,' 'implied right,' and 'the obligation of superior power to protect all,' and 'general welfare and general well-being,' Shaw established that police agencies could have a broader set of instruments in achieving their goals. Southern state governments relied upon police power to enact laws limiting the use of property by enslaved people, for example, prohibiting slaveholders from teaching their enslaved people to read. Later, after the abolition of slavery, they introduced unusual restrictions on private property rights, such as instituting a policy of rigid racial segregation, which limited the sale of property to African Americans or their work in certain types of professions. The application of laws providing unequal protection of property and labor for African Americans once again demonstrates the understanding of property at that time. (see Cohen 1991; Lichtent斯坦 1996; Weiner 1978; Woodworth 1955).