First coined by the Dutch scholar Hugo Grotius in 1625, the term 'eminent domain' entered English law through Locke, who grounded it in 'natural law,' the original consent of the population as delegated to the legislature (Eagle 1996, 8). American judges and legal commentators radically expanded the concept, grounding it on purely instrumental considerations. Denying any sanctity to private property rights, the Vermont Constitution of 1791 proclaimed: "Private property ought to be subservient to public uses, when necessity requires it" (Ely 1998, 33; emphasis added). The United States Supreme Court similarly grounded eminent domain on convenience and instrumental considerations, declaring in the 1875 case Kohl v. United States that the power of eminent domain is "the offspring of political necessity; and it is inseparable from sovereignty." Eminent domain was one example of the use of government power to promote a "well-ordered community," to advance the "public good" or "welfare" through regulations interfering with owners' intensive property rights. Regulations reflected the common law maxims: salus populi suprema lex est ("the welfare of the people is the supreme law") and sic utere tuo ut alienum non laedas ("use your own so as not to injure another"). Often cited in legal decisions, these broad doctrines serve as "common law blueprints for governance in a well-regulated society," providing the legal basis for extensive public regulation of property to reflect the reciprocal interests and rights of all citizens (Novak 1996, 42). Writing in 1826, New York's Chancellor Kent declared that "every individual has as much freedom in the acquisition, use, and disposition of his property, as is consistent with good order and the reciprocal rights of others… Though property be thus protected... the lawgiver has a right to prescribe the mode and manner of using it, so far as may be necessary to prevent the abuse of the right, to the injury or annoyance of others, or of the public." To protect the public welfare and respect the interests of all, local and state governments assumed extensive powers throughout the 19th century. In 1837, for example, the Illinois legislature needed three typed pages to catalogue all the powers over property to be held by the new city of Chicago.