Echoing the New York State court In re. Jacobs, Supreme Court Justice Rufus W. Peckham argued that liberty included more than freedom from "physical restraint of his person," but also embraced a right to "work where he will; to earn his livelihood by any lawful calling; to pursue any livelihood or avocation, and for that purpose to enter into all contracts which may be proper, necessary and essential to his carrying out to a successful conclusion the purposes above mentioned." The train of judicial reasoning behind Allgeyer peaked eight years later in Lochner v. New York (1905) where the Court overturned a New York law restricting hours of work for bakers. Writing again for the Court, Justice Peckham asserted flatly that "the statute necessarily interferes with the right of contract between the employer and employes (sic)" violating the "general right to make a contract in relation to his business" which is "protected by the Fourteenth Amendment of the Federal Constitution." Acknowledging a state police power justification for property regulation to protect "health or morality," Peckham insisted that in this case, "[T]here is no reasonable ground for interfering with the liberty of person or the right of free contract by determining the hours of labor in the occupation of a baker." It is, Peckham concluded, a question of which of two powers or rights shall prevail -- the power of the State to legislate or the right of the individual to liberty of person and freedom of contract. We think the limit of the police power has been reached and passed in this case. Property, Instrumentalism and the New Deal Lochner was followed by other decisions affirming intensive property rights. In Adkins v. Children's Hospital (1923), the Court overturned a minimum wage law for the District of Columbia, ruling that it unconstitutionally seized the property of workers and businesses by intruding on their "freedom of contract" which should be "the general rule and restraint the exception." Oliver Wendell Holmes and Pennsylvania coal
Shortly before Adkins, the Supreme Court made another historic ruling that seemed to commit it to the defense of intensive property rights.