— Forgive me, Captain, — he began rather boldly, suddenly addressing Nicholas Fomin, — please consider my situation… I am even ready to ask them for forgiveness, if I have erred on my part. I am a poor and sick student, disheartened (he actually said, "disheartened") by poverty. I was a student, but now I cannot support myself, but I will get money… My mother and sister are in — th guberniya. They will send me, and I… will pay. My landlady is a good woman, but she has become so angry that I lost my lessons and haven't paid for the fourth month, so she even doesn't send me food… And I don't at all understand what this promissory note is! Now she is demanding from me by this loan note that I pay her, judge for yourselves! — But this is not our business… — the clerk remarked again…

— Allow me, allow me, I entirely agree with you, but allow me also to explain, — Raskolnikov interjected again, not addressing the clerk but turning to Nicholas Fomin, though trying with all his strength to also address Ilya Petrovich, although the latter stubbornly pretended to be searching through papers and disdainfully ignored him, — allow me also to explain that I have been living with her for about three years, since my arrival from the provinces and before… before… in any case, why should I not confess from the start that I had promised her that I would marry her daughter, a verbal promise, completely free… She was a girl… in any case, she even liked me… although I wasn't in love… in a word, youth, that is, I mean to say, that the landlady gave me a lot of credit then and I led partly such a life… I was very frivolous…

— You are not required to explain such intimate details, sir, and there's no time for it, — Ilya Petrovich roughly and triumphantly interrupted, but Raskolnikov warmly stopped him, although it was extremely hard for him suddenly to speak. — But allow me, allow me to tell you partly everything… how it happened and… in turn… although it's unnecessary, I agree with you, to tell, — but a year ago this girl died of typhus, and I remained as a lodger, as before, and when the landlady moved to her current apartment, she told me… and she told me kindly… that she was completely confident in me and everything… but that whether I would like to give her this loan note for one hundred and fifteen rubles, all that she considered as my debt. Allow me to say: she specifically said that as soon as I give this paper, she would again credit me as much as I wished and that never, never, in turn—these were her exact words—she would use this paper, as long as I myself pay… And now, when I have lost my lessons and have nothing to eat, she is already demanding it for collection… What shall I say now? — All these sensitive details, sir, are none of our business, — Ilya Petrovich rudely cut in, — you must give a statement and an obligation, and what you were in love and all these tragic details, we have nothing to do with.