Quite the opposite!...

All of a sudden he stopped; a new, completely unexpected, and extremely simple question immediately threw him off and greatly astonished him:

"If indeed all this was done intentionally, not foolishly, if you really had a definite and firm goal, then how come you haven't even looked into the wallet yet and don't know what you've gotten, because of which you endured all these sufferings and deliberately went through such a mean, nasty, low thing? Indeed, you wanted to throw it into the water now, the wallet, along with all the things you hadn't even seen yet… What on earth?"

Yes, that's true; everything is like that. He, however, had known this before, and it was by no means a new question for him; and when it was decided at night to throw it into the water, it was decided without any hesitation or objection, as though it was only natural, as though otherwise it was impossible… Yes, he knew all of this and remembered everything; indeed, perhaps it was already decided yesterday, at the very moment when he was sitting over the chest and was taking out the cases from it… But that's exactly what!.. "It's because I'm very ill," he decided gloomily at last, "I myself have tortured and torn myself apart, and I don't even know what I'm doing… And yesterday, and the day before, and all this time I've tormented myself… I'll recover and… won't torment myself anymore… What if I never recover at all? Lord! How tired I am of all this!.." He was walking without stopping. He desperately wanted to somehow relieve himself, but he didn't know what to do or what to take action. One new, insurmountable feeling was taking over him more and more, almost with every minute: it was some kind of infinite, almost physical aversion to everything encountered and surrounding, persistent, malicious, hateful. He found everyone he met repulsive— their faces, gait, movements. He would just spit on someone, perhaps bite them, if someone spoke to him… He suddenly stopped when he came to the embankment of the Small Neva, on the Vasilyevsky Island, near the bridge.