— Good grief, Captain, — he began in a very flippant manner, suddenly addressing Nekodim Fomich, — consider my situation… I am even ready to ask them for forgiveness if I have done anything wrong on my part. I am a poor and sick student, depressed (he actually said: "depressed") by poverty. I was once a student, because now I cannot support myself, but I will get money… My mother and sister are in such-and-such a guberniya. They will send for me, and I… will pay. My landlady is a kind woman, but she was so angry that I missed lessons and haven't paid the fourth month's rent, that she doesn't even send me meals… And I don't understand at all what this loan note is! Now she is demanding from me, by virtue of this loan note, that I pay her, judge for yourselves!… — But this is none of our business… — the clerk remarked again…

— Please, please, I completely agree with you, but please let me explain as well, — Raskolnikov interrupted again, addressing not the clerk but Nekodim Fomich, yet striving as much as possible to also address Ilya Petrovich, though the latter stubbornly pretended to be searching through papers and coldly ignored him, — please let me explain from my side that I have been living with her for almost three years, since my arrival from the provinces and before… before… in any case, why should I not confess from the start that I had made a verbal promise, completely free, that I would marry her daughter… It was a girl… in any case, she even liked me… though I wasn't in love… in a word, youth, that is, I mean to say, that the landlady gave me a lot of credit then, and I led a partly such life… I was very thoughtless…

— You are in no way required to reveal such intimate details, sir, and there's no time for it, — Ilya Petrovich roughly and triumphantly interrupted, but Raskolnikov passionately stopped him, although it was extremely hard for him to speak suddenly. — But please, please let me, partly, tell everything… how it happened and… in turn… although it's unnecessary, I agree with you, to tell… — but a year ago this girl died of typhus, and I remained as a lodger as before, and when the landlady moved to her current apartment, she told me… and she told me kindly… that she was completely sure of me and everything… but that whether I would like to give her this loan note for one hundred and fifteen rubles, all that she considered my debt. Please allow me: she specifically said that as soon as I gave this paper, she would again credit me as much as I wanted and that, in turn, — these were her exact words — she would never, never use this paper, as long as I myself paid… And now, when I have lost my lessons and have nothing to offer, she is already demanding it for collection… What shall I say now? — All these sensitive details, sir, are not our concern, — Ilya Petrovich rudely cut in, — you must give a statement and an undertaking, and what you were in love and all these tragic details, we have nothing to do with.